[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
Are you experiencing any of
these symptoms-- fatigue,
bloating, depression,
weight gain, hair loss,
thinning eyebrows, or brain fog?
Have you tried various
supplements and medications
for digestion and
thyroid disease,
and either they haven't
worked, or you've just
had to increase the
medication so much
that you are on that track.
Well, what we're
talking about today
is going to be
very, very helpful.
Because an estimated
20 million Americans
have some form of
thyroid disease
and they suffer from the
symptoms that I just mentioned.
Joining me is Dr. Gil Kajiki.
And he's from the Valley
Thyroid Institute,
where he has been
helping people reverse
many of the symptoms
of thyroiditis.
Welcome.
Thank you so much
for being here.
>>GIL KAJIKI: Thank you, Lisa.
Hello.
>>LISA: So let's talk about
the thyroid gland itself.
And actually, let me talk about
about that statistic I just
mentioned.
Is it true 20 million, or is it
more, less, in your experience?
>>KAJIKI: It's probably more.
20 million, which people
get off the internet,
it's probably just the
diagnosed conditions.
There are so many
cases of undiagnosed
that that doesn't even
reach the statistics.
>>LISA: So it's about, it
could be anywhere between--
>>KAJIKI: 50--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GIL KAJIKI: 100 million.
Sure.
>>LISA: People that contact you.
All right.
So let's talk about the
function of the thyroid gland.
What does it do?
Where is it located?
>>KAJIKI: Well,
the thyroid gland
is a little butterfly
shaped gland located
right in front of
your throat here.
And the thyroid gland is the
spark plug for metabolism.
That's where it all starts.
So everything starts at
that spark plug right there.
But that spark plug controls
every cell in the entire body.
It controls the metabolism and
mesobolic rate for everything
out there.
>>LISA: Is that
including hormones,
or is it just metabolism?
>>KAJIKI: Including hormones.
Every cell in the
body has something
called a thyroid receptor site.
So it's like a little garage
for that thyroid hormone.
And every cell has that.
So if that car
doesn't work right,
or that cell doesn't work
right, or that receptor doesn't
work right, you don't get
proper hormone function.
>>LISA: So every cell,
three million or whatever,
trillion cells are in your
body has a little receptor
site that that tiny
little gland emits.
Is it a hormone?
>>KAJIKI: A hormone.
The hormone that the thyroid
travels through the body
to get to that cell to make
that cell function properly.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So it's about cell function,
metabolism, hormone balance,
everything.
>>KAJIKI: Absolutely.
So when your thyroid goes bad,
everything starts to go bad.
>>LISA: So that's
why I was mentioning
all those, that laundry list
of items that we're going over.
How does it relate to the
hair loss, and the dry skin,
and the lower third of
the eyebrows coming out.
What does that
have to do with it?
>>KAJIKI: Well, the problem with
symptoms is that a lot of them
overlap each other.
So just thyroid,
poor thyroid function
alone could give you
all those symptoms.
But so could female
hormone imbalance.
And so you've got these
mixture of different symptoms
that you really never know
where is it coming from.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KAJIKI: So it's a
very complex condition.
>>LISA: Do people
ever make the mistake
of addressing the female
hormone problem first, and not
addressing the thyroid?
>>KAJIKI: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
And all depend upon
which doctor you go to.
So if you choose the
doctor you go to.
And you think it's hormone, then
you go to the hormone doctor.
The hormone doctor's going
to find a hormone problem.
>>LISA: Right.
OK.
>>KAJIKI: If you go to
the endocrinologist,
the endocrinologist
will find a--
>>LISA: Thyroid problem.
>>KAJIKI: Thyroid problem.
>>LISA: Mhm.
Interesting.
So this actually can help
with the hormone issue
if you fix the thyroid or
treat the thyroid first.
>>KAJIKI: I will tell
you that the thyroid has
a very strong influence over all
the male and female hormones,
very strong influence.
But sometimes we don't know if
it's the chicken or the egg.
Both have an influence
on each other.
>>LISA: Well, obviously, you
can't fix one without the other
though.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: So that's a
little off balance.
OK, so now let's talk about
the underdiagnosed portion
of the statistics that
we mentioned earlier.
What are the ranges based
on in an average blood test
or thyroid test?
>>KAJIKI: Well,
there's something
called pathological ranges,
which is the lab test
range that you get
with the blood test.
And if you've ever
taken note on that,
if you've gone to
several labs, you'll
notice that the ranges
differ from lab to lab.
>>LISA: Oh, I wouldn't
have known that.
Oh, interesting.
Yeah.
>>KAJIKI: Yes, which
is very strange.
Because the doctors tell
you you're in normal range.
Or you're out of normal range.
Yet how could the lab ranges
be different from one lab
to another?
So if you take a
look at your labs,
you'll notice that the lab
ranges differ from one lab
to another.
>>LISA: Why?
>>KAJIKI: And they also
differ from one city or state
to another.
Because the way they
get those lab ranges
are they take all the
people from last year.
They put them in a bell curve.
They throw out the highs.
They throw out the lows.
And this is the range.
But now you have to
consider that range.
Who's actually in that range?
These are people who are on
medication, not on medication.
>>LISA: Sick in the first place.
That's why they
came to the doctor.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
So that's not really
a normal range.
It's what we call a
statistical average.
>>LISA: That's like
if you were to take
the obesity rate of a nation.
And you were to take last
year's average weight
and make that the new norm.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: That's exactly
what they're doing.
>>LISA: That's why.
I mean, that doesn't make sense.
>>KAJIKI: It doesn't make sense.
But because there's no
quote unquote "normal"
that the standard of
medical care uses,
they use these averages.
Because it is different from
different parts of the country.
>>LISA: OK.
So this is something
that is acceptable.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Medically.
>>LISA: Yet it's worth it to
educate ourselves about so we
know why we're not feeling
well, even though our ranges are
within--
>>KAJIKI: Absolutely.
>>LISA: The norm.
So what should the range be?
>>KAJIKI: So the
ranges should be--
we use what we call
functional lab ranges.
And functional
averages were developed
by health care practitioners
such as myself,
where we look at
early detection.
We want to catch the problem
before it becomes a disease
process.
By the time the pathological
ranges are overtaken,
then it's a
pathological process.
But with a functional
range, it's much narrower.
So it's a tighter range.
So we can see
things that are just
starting to become a problem.
And then we can decide if we're
going to jump on that right
away or not, rather than let it
get worse and worse and worse.
>>LISA: Because the
longer that it's in place
without being treated, does
it make it harder to reverse?
>>KAJIKI: In a
lot of cases, yes.
And the way the medical
and drug community work
is there has to be a
certain number that lab
has to reach before they're
able to dispense medication
for that.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
You're kidding.
>>KAJIKI: Yes, yes.
>>LISA: Wow.
Interesting.
So early detection is the
best prevention at this point.
>>KAJIKI: Absolutely.
And that's for anything.
It's better to catch it and
then decide to work on it.
>>LISA: So why
does the thyroid go
into an attack mode on itself?
That's otherwise knows
as Hashimoto's, right?
>>KAJIKI: Right, right.
So that's an immune attack
of the immune system
on the thyroid.
Why does it?
That's the million
dollar question there.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: But what we do know is
there's genetic predisposition.
That's kind of a bummer.
There are uneducated
lifestyle choices.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: There are--
>>LISA: Mhm.
And we'll talk
about those today.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
There are poor food choices.
There are other
things like triggers
that cause this
autoimmune attack.
And there's the case
of people just not even
knowing, not even knowing
it exists in their body.
>>LISA: Right, just feeling
fatigued, and tired,
and going after all those
supplements out there.
I mean, there's a supplement
for every single thing
that I mentioned.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Memory.
For the brain fog.
And then we've got the
inflammation and all of that.
There's supplements for.
There's antacids
and all of that.
So it's all fixable
from the outside in.
But you're not ever addressing
the root cause, right?
>>KAJIKI: Right.
Right.
>>LISA: That's what I find so
interesting, because there's
multi-billion dollar supplements
for every single thing
that I mentioned.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
Yes.
And going back to your response
about under diagnose-- I mean,
the reason it gets
under diagnosed
is because the standard
for medical care
is fix the TSH
levels, and that's it.
So they'll do free
T3, free T4, TSH,
but what about all
the other tests?
But that's not
standard medical care.
So they go after fixing the TSH.
And yet, there might be
all these other underlying
problems, like an
autoimmune attack,
that they don't even know about.
And so these problems worsen
and worsen and worsen.
The body starts
breaking down more,
and more, and more,
even though their lab
ranges may be
within normal range.
>>LISA: So let's take
a look at this slide
here that kind of
explains a path-- which
I love Dr. Kajiki's put this
into a really easy way for us
to learn about it.
So take a look at this here.
We've got the thyroid,
and the immune system,
and inflammation
completely linked here.
Can you explain this?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
So in most cases, people come
see me for a thyroid problem.
Most of the cases of
thyroid are hypothyroid.
That's a sluggish, slow thyroid.
The way the doctors determine
it is a test called TSH.
That's your thyroid
stimulating hormone.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: Now it's
kind of strange
because if the TSH is high,
you have a slow thyroid.
But if the TSH is low,
you have a fast thyroid.
>>LISA: OK.
So it's reversed.
>>KAJIKI: It's reversed.
Yes.
What you think of is
if it's hypo and slow,
you want high stimulation.
That's why the TSH is high.
>>LISA: Ah.
Interesting.
That's why those
types of people go
for the coffee and
the stimulants.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: More than, OK.
>>KAJIKI: Because
they're sluggish.
Exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: So what we know
is that 70% to 90% of all
the people who have hypothyroid
have a condition called
autoimmune Hashimoto's.
>>LISA: 70%.
>>KAJIKI: 70 to 90% of all the
people who have hypothyroid.
So you're diagnosed
with high TSH, which
means you're going to get
medication, Synthroid,
levothyroxine,
Armour, Nature-Throid.
There are 70% to
90% of those people
who have an autoimmune
component to that condition.
That's autoimmune Hashimoto's.
>>LISA: Now is
there a high chance
that they'll have a
secondary autoimmune issue?
>>KAJIKI: At least 40% chance.
>>LISA: That's huge.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
So if your immune system
is attacking your thyroid,
there's at least
a 40% chance it's
attacking your brain,
your colon, your pancreas,
your connective
tissue, your joints.
>>LISA: And those are known
as you, just mentioned, MS.
>>KAJIKI: MS. Lupus.
Diabetes I. (IN UNISON)
Rheumatoid arthritis.
Celiac.
>>LISA: Wow.
All of those.
So if you have
hypothyroidism, 70 to 90%
chance you have Hashimoto's,
an additional 40%
chance you'll have a secondary
autoimmune dysfunction.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: On the way.
>>LISA: Down the freeway.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KAJIKI: And that is my
concern as the health care
practitioner.
It's not just the
Hashimoto's thyroid.
It's if we don't get
control on this autoimmune,
it's going to open
up Pandora's box.
>>LISA: Huge.
OK.
So can this be started to
be solved through food?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
That's a start.
I mean, food is
probably the one thing
that we put into our bodies
multiple times per day.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KAJIKI: And nobody
really knows how to eat.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KAJIKI: We've
kind of all fallen
for what the media has told us.
But we really don't
know how to eat.
>>LISA: Interesting..
In what way?
What do you mean?
>>KAJIKI: Well, we've all bought
into the low fat lies, that
eat low fat and that'll
keep you from getting fat.
And so what we do is we
drift towards carbohydrates,
which are nonfat, like rice,
and corn, and potatoes.
What that does is just
skyrockets the blood sugar,
which will cause
inflammatory processes,
insulin resistance,
hormone imbalance.
It just starts a whole
cascade of problems.
>>LISA: And so people
that are also hypothyroid
are going to look for
those fast burning carbs
to get the energy from.
>>KAJIKI: Energy
they need, right.
>>LISA: But they're in turn
inflaming the immune system.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: Turning, just
lighting them on fire.
>>KAJIKI: Right
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: The immune system is
very sensitive to inflammation.
And that inflammation
could come from foods.
It could come from infections.
It could come from
cortisol surges.
I mean, it can come from
a whole number of areas.
>>LISA: OK.
Well, let's take a look
at this other slide.
And this is very in
depth slide here,
but it shows the triggers of
the inflaming the immune system,
right?
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: OK.
So there's how many triggers
have you identified here?
>>KAJIKI: So these are the
seven most common triggers.
And there are certainly
many, many more.
But these are the
most common seven,
which is anemia and blood sugar
instability, adrenal gland
dysfunction, hormone
imbalance, inflammation,
gastrointestinal problems,
and food sensitivities.
And you could easily add
on environmental toxins.
>>LISA: Wow.
Genetically modified foods.
>>KAJIKI: Genetically
modified foods, right.
Stresses.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>KAJIKI: So there's
a whole nother
list of things you could put on.
But what I found is if
you address these most
common seven, you will get a
good jump on your condition.
>>LISA: OK.
So let's break it
down a little bit.
Let's start off with the anemia.
How would you know
that you're anemic?
Would this be
through a blood test?
>>KAJIKI: Through a blood test.
And many people don't
know they're anemic.
They just know they're fatigued.
And so the most
common thing to think
is that you have an iron anemia.
But it could be an
iron deficiency but not
an iron anemia.
It could also be a B12
anemia, or folic acid.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>KAJIKI: Or a B1.
>>LISA: Oh. and
is there inability
for people with
Hashimoto's or thyroiditis
to absorb vitamin B?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
And that's another
autoimmune condition,
where they are autoimmune
to the intrinsic factor.
And so they can't
absorb the vitamin B.
>>LISA: My goodness.
>>KAJIKI: So you could
be taking a vitamin
B that has intrinsic
factor in it.
And then you're creating
your own autoimmune attack
against the very
vitamin you're taking.
>>LISA: My, god.
That's not fun.
I mean, I'm going through
this myself physically now.
So I am relating to the audience
in a way that most people,
I mean.
I know exactly what
you're talking about.
My body responds the same way
that you're talking about.
I'm discovering all of
this along with you.
So this is really super helpful.
So I'm asking very, very
detailed questions here.
So anemia-- did you mention
what the ranges for TSH
that you consider high?
>>KAJIKI: What I use,
I use something--
I use the range of 1.8 to 3.0.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: That would be a
functional lab range for TSH.
>>LISA: OK.
1.8 to 3.0.
Anything above or below,
anything above that
is going to be hypo.
>>KAJIKI: It's going
to be hypothyroid
and below is hyperthyroid.
>>LISA: OK.
And then hyperthyroid,
we can also touch on,
is when you feel
cold all the time.
And you can't get your
body temperature up?
>>KAJIKI: It could be.
That could be hypothyroid, too.
There's a lot of people
out there with hypothyroid
saying I feel cold all the time.
And I can't get moving.
Because they have
low blood pressure,
so they don't heal right.
They don't have good circulation
to their hands and their toes.
So it's really difficult
to name a symptom
and then call that
a disease process.
>>LISA: Wow, interesting.
OK.
All right, now let's take
a look at the second one.
It was unstable blood sugar.
So these are not
eating often enough,
eating too much sugar
when you do eat.
What else?
>>KAJIKI: Skipping a meal.
Skipping a meal is one of
the most notorious things
out there.
So many people who have
hypothyroid have weight gain.
And so they feel
like if they eat,
they're going to gain weight.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KAJIKI: So their
answer is well,
I'm just going to
skip this meal.
And then I won't
put the calories in.
And they won't gain weight.
The blood sugar
instability is probably
the number one physiological
stressor in the body.
>>LISA: And is it one of the
main causes of weight gain?
>>KAJIKI: It is, yes.
I would say it's one
of the main causes.
>>LISA: Not eating.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KAJIKI: I mean,
if you just think
of it from a logical
perspective, if you don't eat,
then your body's
not going to know
when that next meal's coming.
And it's going to say, I'm
not letting go of this fat.
I don't know when I'm
going to eat next.
But the best thing you can
do is eat very consistently
every two to three hours
so that your body knows
when to burn that sugar and when
it's going to expect it again.
Really stable blood sugar.
>>LISA: So every two to three
hours, eat consistently.
But you have to-- we're going to
talk about what kinds of foods
to eat.
And that can actually-- we
could skip ahead to that,
to the food.
This isn't a specific
order, right?
>>KAJIKI: No.
>>LISA: OK, so
food sensitivities.
How do you determine
what foods, I mean,
that a particular person is
going to get inflamed by?
>>KAJIKI: You don't.
Unfortunately, you don't know.
And so I do something called
a de-inflammatory diet.
And what I do is I take
away all the possible foods
that could inflame you.
And they're foods
that you wouldn't even
think about, like nuts, and
beans, and rice, and corn,
and potatoes, and nightshades,
and yeast, and eggs, and dairy,
and gluten.
>>LISA: People would think
that eating nuts, and seeds,
and beans, and rice
is a healthy diet.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
And in some cases, it is.
I'm certainly not saying that
everyone is sensitive to them.
But over the years, I've
been very surprised at people
who are sensitive
to eggs, people
to nuts, people
who are sensitive to rice.
We would have never known this
unless we took 'em away first.
>>LISA: Rice.
Wow.
All right.
So you do individual testing for
people so that they can learn--
and how many different
types of tests do you do?
>>KAJIKI: Oh, gosh.
We probably do at least
four to five basic tests.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: That test for adrenal
gland dysfunction, and hormone
imbalance, and blood
sugar instability.
We cover the basic triggers with
the initial tests that we do.
But then there are those very
difficult, complicated cases
where we to get into
carbohydrate metabolism
and heavy metal poisonings.
And so there's a whole
nother level of complication.
But we start with
everybody with the foods.
>>LISA: And you do blood
tests, urine tests.
>>KAJIKI: Saliva tests.
>>LISA: Saliva tests.
>>KAJIKI: Stool tests.
>>LISA: Stool.
So you go through every
function of the body to find out
what's-- so for example, the
urine tests are the best way
to determine cortisol
levels, right?
>>KAJIKI: Cortisol
levels, and even male
and female hormone levels, too.
>>LISA: Really.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
So that'll bring us to the
adrenal part of the triggers.
So when you said
adrenal dysfunction,
how would you know that
the adrenals are shot?
How would you know?
>>KAJIKI: There would be no
way unless you got a test.
>>LISA: And this
is the urine test?
>>KAJIKI: A urine
test is one way.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: You could do
saliva test is another way.
There's different
methods of doing it.
I personally feel like the
urine test is the most accurate.
And it tells you the
most information.
The saliva test
would be secondary.
>>LISA: What does the urine test
tell you about cortisol levels?
>>KAJIKI: It'll tell you
how much you're making.
It'll tell you when
you're making them.
But most importantly, it
tells you what are you doing
with the cortisol you're making.
>>LISA: So cortisol's a
stress hormone, right?
>>KAJIKI: Cortisol
is a stress hormone.
>>LISA: And it releases
when you're under stress.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: And what's its function?
>>KAJIKI: Well, your body
doesn't know the difference
between you missing a meal
or being chased by a lion.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KAJIKI: Because you
have a cortisol surge.
Or if you're in a
fight with your spouse,
or if you're stressed under
work, or if you're in traffic
and you're late, you're
surging your cortisol.
The body doesn't know
that it's not a lion.
It just knows you're
surging your cortisol.
So you're creating
this stress situation,
raises your cortisol, then it
starts looking for blood sugar
to supply your body being
under higher metabolism.
>>LISA: Mm.
To give it energy.
>>KAJIKI: To give
you energy, exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
And so does that cortisol
eventually release in the body?
Does it pool?
Does it cause damage?
>>KAJIKI: Yes, all those.
So it definitely
releases in the body.
But here's what's great
about the urine test.
It tells you what are you
doing with the cortisol
you're releasing?
>>LISA: So if it's detoxifying
properly in the body.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
Or is it getting
caught up in the brain,
or is it being distributed
through the bloodstream.
The saliva test, unfortunately,
tells you the quantity,
but it doesn't tell
you what you're
doing with that quantity.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: So there are
different kinds of test
you can use to determine
what's going on
with those adrenal glands.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
So now back to the
food part of it,
so once you've determined
what the cortisol's doing
in the body, we're going to
talk about some solutions here
on what foods you
can eat and how
do you get the cortisol wicked
out of the body, detoxified
in the proper way, so it doesn't
affect the brain and the blood.
>>KAJIKI: OK.
OK.
>>LISA: That's a big one.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah, that's a lot.
Did we get through the seven
triggers of-- of course,
inflammation is caused,
hormone imbalance, and then
the gastrointestinal.
>>KAJIKI: That's a
big one in itself.
>>LISA: It is?
OK.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
We should spend some
time on that one.
>>LISA: All right.
Let's do that.
Because I wanted to
stick with the triggers.
So gastrointestinal issues.
>>KAJIKI: OK.
Gastrointestinal issues.
Many people confuse
common for normal.
In other words, oh, I
have the normal gas.
Or I have normal burping.
Those are all
gastrointestinal dysfunctions.
>>LISA: Dysfunctions.
>>KAJIKI: Your body's
not functioning right.
If you've got burping, acid
reflux, bloating or swelling
after meals.
If you have indigestion.
If you have bowel movements
that don't occur every day.
If you don't have stools
that properly sink,
or are the proper
color, you have
a gastrointestinal dysfunction.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KAJIKI: My biggest concern
about gastrointestinal
is that if you have an
autoimmune condition,
such as Hashimoto's or
rheumatoid arthritis,
or MS, or ALS, 70%
of your immune system
is threaded throughout
your GI track.
>>LISA: Oh, so--
>>KAJIKI: The majority.
>>LISA: So if you're
having acid reflux
and the acid alkaline
balance is off,
it's going to
continually be inflamed.
>>KAJIKI: It's going to
continue to be inflamed.
It's going to let off these
inflammatory cytokines,
inflames the immune system, the
immune system gets the message.
It attacks your thyroid.
It attacks your brain.
It attacks your colon.
I mean, so just
having an imbalance
of good and bad bacteria,
like a dysbiosis,
could fire off an
autoimmune attack.
>>LISA: So all
autoimmune disease
is based on inflammation.
>>KAJIKI: As one
of the triggers.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: I mean,
that's only just one.
It's also based on
hormone imbalances.
food sensitivities.
It's also based on infections.
>>LISA: I hope that people
are realizing, as I am,
that this is not a one
thing fix all solution.
You cannot just take a
medication to fix this.
You cannot just do-- you have to
do like seven or eight things.
But it's doable.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
Yes.
The body, unfortunately,
there's a domino effect.
So when one system goes bad,
it creates multiple body
dysfunctions.
But it doesn't work the
opposite way around.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GIL KAJIKI: Where you fix
the one and they all fix it.
No, you've got to work on
all these other things, too.
>>LISA: Well, it
also helps to know,
for someone that understands
what it is that you're talking
about, because there's-- I
mean, many of the doctors that
I've seen are into the
one step fix all solution.
Take the Synthroid.
See me in six months in
order to get more Synthroid.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
And, unfortunately--
>>LISA: I've heard
that for years.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
If you go to the specialist,
that's even more so true.
>>LISA: Mm.
Really?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KAJIKI: The specialists
have a specialty.
They're focused.
They're very laser
focused on the one system,
even though they know all these
other body systems affected,
they're focused on
that one system.
>>LISA: I mean, people
will know that have
been through this experience.
You take the Synthroid.
You call in six months.
You get another test read
to see that's working.
If it's not, you just up the
dosage to another six months,
see if it's working.
If it's not, you up the dosage.
That's why it's a hamster
wheel that's going uphill.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
Yes.
And that gets back to
our underdiagnosis.
If all they're looking at
is that TSH and that dosage,
they're going to completely
miss the underlying condition
of Hashimoto's.
>>LISA: Wow.
Fascinating.
And all the other
autoimmune dysfunctions
we talked about as well.
So then let's talk a little
bit about the-- well,
we talked about the
hormone imbalance
and how that's related.
So take, for example,
if you go get
the bioidenticals,
the hormone creams.
Could somebody with an
autoimmune dysfunction
seem like they're getting an
allergic reaction to something
like that because it's
inflaming the system?
>>KAJIKI: Yes, it could be.
I mean, inflammation is
definitely one of the things.
But it also could be
just strictly thyroid.
I mean, just the thyroid
dysfunction in itself
could give you hot flashes
and night sweats, which
makes you think you
have a hormone imbalance
but it may not be.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: And so this is part
of the whole underdiagnosing
condition is really what is it?
>>LISA: Wow, most people
would think that's menopause.
>>KAJIKI: Yes, exactly.
And it's very often
mistaken for menopause.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>KAJIKI: So I get a lot
of people who say yeah,
I'm taking the bioidenticals.
And I don't understand.
I still have the hot flashes.
I still have the night sweats.
I'm still burning up.
What's going on?
>>LISA: I spoke to a
woman the other day
who has been having for every
single hour of life for seven
years has had a hot flash.
>>KAJIKI: That's miserable.
>>LISA: And it doesn't
have to be that way.
So if somebody has
a healthy thyroid,
they could go through menopause
without any of those symptoms,
right?
>>KAJIKI: Should be, as long as
their female and male hormones
are in balance as well.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: Now I could tell you
that one of the triggers that
throw off hormone the
most is blood sugar.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Wow.
So not eating enough.
>>KAJIKI: Not eating enough
will cause an insulin surge.
Or eating foods too high in
carbohydrates cause insulin
surges.
Insulin surges then create an
overabundance of testosterone
in your system.
>>LISA: Oh, and that
throws off the whole--
>>KAJIKI: Right.
And that's what you call PCOS,
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>KAJIKI: That's excess of
testosterone that is created.
>>LISA: And that causes cysts.
>>KAJIKI: It causes cysts.
It causes unwanted facial hair.
Tender breasts.
>>LISA: Wow.
Interesting.
Let's talk about the food now.
So there's a chart here
that you've put together
about thyroid
dysfunction and some
of the signs of the
metabolic dysfunction.
We talked about some
of the testing here.
We went through this.
We haven't talked about food
sensitivities enough here.
So let's talk about
gluten, first of all.
Many people have taken
gluten out of their diets
only to find that they still
have the same symptoms,
by eating the gluten free
breads, the gluten free pastas,
the gluten free pizzas.
Why is that?
>>KAJIKI: Well, first
up, the first thing I'll
ask them is, are you
sure you're gluten free.
Because some people think gluten
only exists in pasta and bread.
But it's in soy sauce.
It's in makeup.
It's an hair conditioner.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KAJIKI: It's in shampoo.
It's in cosmetics.
It's in beer.
It's in food colorings.
It disguised as
natural flavorings.
>>LISA: It's in, I
think, rootbeer also.
>>KAJIKI: It's in rootbeer.
>>LISA: Rootbeer.
>>KAJIKI: It's in some wine.
>>LISA: Really?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KAJIKI: So maybe your best
attempt at eating gluten free,
not eating bread and
pasta and cereal,
you may be eating some of these
other items that contain gluten
that you just don't realize it.
So that's the first
problem, is maybe
you're not really gluten free.
>>LISA: Interesting.
And if your body is in that
state of an inflamed state,
then those things
like the shampoo,
and the conditioner,
and the makeup
will cause your body to
go into the same reaction.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: Gluten to Hashimoto's
is like jet fuel on fire.
That's--
>>LISA: Just lights.
>>KAJIKI: It just
lights the fire.
It just makes everything worse,
makes the inflammation worse,
makes the condition worse.
Do you think that that's
probably the number one
trigger, or do you
think that it's
just dependent on the person
with the eggs, and the nuts,
and all of the other things.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah, I don't
think it's the number one.
But I think it's a
necessary trigger.
I mean, if somebody is diagnosed
with Hashimoto's or any kind
autoimmune, they need
to be off gluten.
There's nothing good
about gluten for you.
>>LISA: Like hands down.
OK.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
Now the other thing
is there's testing
that we do by a
company called Cyrex.
They have a test called gluten
cross reacting proteins.
And so for these are the people
who they say, I'm perfect.
I don't eat any of these
gluten containing foods.
But they do eat rice
and corn and soy.
Well, gluten cross
reacting foods
is these foods have the
same molecular structure.
The first three molecules
look the same as gluten.
And in some people's
bodies, they
eat this corn and their
body thinks its gluten.
So it attacks the corn
as if it were gluten.
Creates an autoimmune attack.
That immune system then
attacks that thyroid gland,
even though you're gluten free.
>>LISA: My goodness.
Well, what about
these-- I mean, those
are the three most
genetically modified crops
out there, wheat,
corn, soy, those three.
Yeah.
So do you think it's the
genetic modification?
Or do you think it's
the chicken or the egg?
>>KAJIKI: It is the
genetic modification.
I mean, to my knowledge, you
can't find any natural forms
of wheat left in the world.
>>LISA: Really.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
It's been modified so
many different times,
your body doesn't
know the difference
between that and a pencil.
>>LISA: Over-- wow.
Over how many years
has been modified?
>>KAJIKI: 100 years.
>>LISA: 100 years.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Huh.
And all around the world?
>>KAJIKI: All around the
world, but some places
less than others.
People can go to
Europe and eat wheat
and they wouldn't get as much
of a reaction, or one at all.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: So it's different in
different parts of the world.
>>LISA: Maybe in Italy.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah, maybe in Italy.
>>LISA: Where I was-- yeah.
So, OK, so there's-- you
mentioned corn, you mentioned--
we haven't talked about soy.
>>KAJIKI: Soy.
>>LISA: So what types
of products is soy in.
>>KAJIKI: Soy is in
everything, unfortunately.
>>LISA: Everything.
>>KAJIKI: If you go out
to eat at a restaurant,
they're likely to use
some kind of vegetable oil
to cook your food in.
>>LISA: And that's--
>>KAJIKI: And that's got soy.
It's got soy.
And it's got corn.
It's vegetable oil.
>>LISA: Vegetables.
OK.
What is canola oil?
What's a canola?
What is a canola?
>>KAJIKI: There's
no canola plant.
>>LISA: I've never
heard of a canola plant.
>>KAJIKI: And I just
learned this the other day.
But it's an offshoot of
different kinds of oils
that they put together.
But it's a very rancid oil.
It burns very quickly.
And it's got a very,
very low burn rate on it.
But it's a synthetic oil.
>>LISA: Synthetic oil.
Interesting, and we put it--
>>KAJIKI: It's not
found in nature.
>>LISA: Oh, no.
I've never heard
of a canola plant.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: So it's a combination
of oils, safflower
and whatever else that
if you read the label,
it's not just olive oil.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: It's different things.
It could be safflower.
It could be all sorts
of different things.
And it could be soy.
>>KAJIKI: It could be soy.
>>LISA: Lecithin,
whatever it is.
Fat, basically.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
We just try to stay away
from it, because it's just,
it's an unnatural product.
>>LISA: Good to know.
And it's in all those
spray things, right.
Can you-- so what
oil do you recommend?
>>KAJIKI: Olive oil's great.
Coconut oil is really good.
>>LISA: That also has a
low burn rate, though.
What's that got to
do with the oil?
>>KAJIKI: Nothing as far
as the burn rate goes.
But it's got the good
fats in it that you want.
And it's really
very-- it doesn't
tend to flare up
people very much.
>>LISA: OK.
Now let's talk a little
bit about that poor corn.
I mean, corn is the only
thing that gluten free people
could eat.
Why is it so bad in terms
of causing inflammation?
>>KAJIKI: Well,
once again, it's a--
>>LISA: It's just wrong.
>>KAJIKI: It's a gluten cross
reaching protein for one thing.
So it looks like gluten
in some people's bodies.
Which is just bad luck.
The other thing, it's
genetically modified, you know.
It just--
>>LISA: The same as wheat.
>>KAJIKI: The same
as wheat, yeah.
It just doesn't look like
a piece of corn should.
>>LISA: Oh, gosh.
We don't even know.
So you'd say for the past
say 50 to 100 years also?
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
I mean, I'm not very
good at the agriculture,
but I can tell you that it's--
and it's in everything, right.
It's a sweeter.
>>LISA: Right.
Corn syrup.
>>KAJIKI: High fructose
corn syrup, right.
Exactly.
It's a sweeter.
>>LISA: Is corn.
>>KAJIKI: It's
very high glycemic.
So it really skyrockets
your blood sugar,
which is going to
cause this is insulin
surge and this
inflammatory process.
>>LISA: Hmh.
You can most likely go
to the stock exchange
and see the most highly
traded commodities
and bet that those are
genetically modified, right,
because there's such a
high demand for them.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: So even if
you grow the stuff
in your backyard, the
seed that you bought,
even if it says
organic, is most likely
from some type of
genetically modified source.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah,
the seed is going
to be genetically
modified to some degree.
Now, it's going to be better
for you because you're not
going to use the pesticides and
the sprays like other places
would.
But once again, you
don't know if your body's
going to flare up to it.
And once again, it's a very
high glycemic vegetable.
>>LISA: Mhm.
I guess you need to
do your research.
I mean, maybe there's certain
corn farms in Idaho that have
specific non-genetically
modified if it's a family farm
that's been in generational--
>>KAJIKI: Right.
And we don't take corn
away from people forever.
I mean, what we do is we go
through this de-inflammatory
process.
We fix the gut.
And then we start
reintroducing these foods back
in one at a time.
And that's the thing is
when you reintroduce foods,
if you get flared
up to that food,
if you didn't fix
that gut, you don't
know is that a gut reaction,
or is that food reaction.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: So you've got
to fix that gut first.
>>LISA: So your
protocol basically lasts
for a certain period
of time, right?
How long before
people will start
to-- what's the
full period of time?
>>KAJIKI: It's going to vary.
I mean, it really is.
I mean, I wish I could
give you time period on it.
But basically, the way it
works is we de-inflame the body
by we take away all
those inflammatory foods.
First.
We give them
de-inflammatory supplements,
which I think we'll talk
about supplements, too.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KAJIKI: So we
de-inflame that body.
Then we start searching
out that gut process
to see if there's any kind
of infections or leaky gut
process.
Once I'm convinced that
leaky gut is fixed,
then we could start
reintroducing foods back in.
And for some people,
that's two months.
For some people,
that's six months.
that's five months.
It just varies from
person to person.
>>LISA: OK.
What is leaky gut?
That's such an overused
term at this point.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
And nobody seems
really know what it is.
>>LISA: Right, yeah.
>>KAJIKI: Your gut houses--
your gut digests all your food.
And none of that
food is supposed
to escape into that bloodstream.
>>LISA: So it goes through the
small intestine into the large
intestine and it's--
>>KAJIKI: Right.
Then it's processed by the body.
And then out comes your stools.
Well, these walls absorb
all the nutrients.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>KAJIKI: These walls
have little cells,
kind of like a picket fence.
Well, if that picket
fence is broken,
that has a direct link
down to the bloodstream.
So you can even eat something
as healthy as an organic carrot,
and if that little particle
escapes through those cells
into that bloodstream,
the immune system
sees that as an enemy.
It's not supposed to be there.
So it will attack
that organic carrot,
consequently causing
another autoimmune attack
on your thyroid or
your joints, or your--
>>LISA: So the little picket
fence part that's missing would
have been caused by--
>>KAJIKI: Inflammation,
parasites, infections, food
sensitivities.
>>LISA: Wow.
Acid.
>>KAJIKI: Acid, right.
Inflammation primarily
breaks those little links.
>>LISA: OK.
I see.
So does the
overproduction of acid,
when somebody takes an
antacid for, say, heartburn,
does that actually
interrupt the process
of the proper acids
going into the body
to break down the food?
>>KAJIKI: If somebody's taking
an antacid because they think
they have an
overproduction, what they're
doing is they're
telling the body
to shut down the
acid production.
>>LISA: And that can't be good.
>>KAJIKI: That can't be good.
>>LISA: That's what
breaks the food down.
>>KAJIKI: That's what breaks
the food down, exactly.
And so really, most cases of
people having acid reflux,
they need more
acid not less acid.
>>LISA: More of the
right kind of acid.
>>KAJIKI: Right, the
hydrochloric acid.
>>LISA: That's not
produced from the food.
It's produced from the--
>>KAJIKI: Body.
Right.
>>LISA: So the
antacids actually cause
the exact opposite
reaction, or function
that you want them to cause.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: But then, why
are they so popular?
They must work temporarily.
>>KAJIKI: They work temporarily
as long as people take them.
So what happens is the
food just gets undigested
improperly and just
goes down the chain.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
So now, back to the foods
that you should eat.
Because I want to
make sure that people
have lots of solutions here.
So you talked about high fat,
so the right type of fats.
>>KAJIKI: Right type of fats.
>>LISA: What are the
right types of fats?
>>KAJIKI: Coconut oils,
right, fish, right.
I'm even OK with
beef and chicken,
turkey, any kind of animal
protein is a good kind of fat.
>>LISA: OK.
What about avocados?
>>KAJIKI: Avocados.
Olive oil.
>>LISA: But not nuts.
>>KAJIKI: Not nuts for now.
OK, not saying that everyone
is sensitive to them.
But I could tell you, I've
been through a number of cases
where I start reintroducing
nuts to people
and they say, oh my gosh.
I flared up to almonds.
But I didn't flare
up to cashews.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: I flared
up to hazelnuts
but I didn't flare
up to peanuts.
You just don't know.
>>LISA: Just the
different properties and--
>>KAJIKI: Different
properties, yeah.
And different genetic
makeups of people's bodies.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>KAJIKI: So we don't allow
the nuts in the beginning.
>>LISA: What about butter?
>>KAJIKI: Butter's fine.
Well, let me rephrase that.
Coconut butter is fine.
>>LISA: Coconut butter?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>KAJIKI: Coconut butter's fine.
I don't want regular
dairy butter,
because that's a dairy product.
The dairy product will
tend to inflame people.
Gluten and dairy are the
two most notorious items
for flaring people up.
>>LISA: OK.
We haven't talked
about our friend dairy.
Why does that cause
so much inflammation?
>>KAJIKI: It's a gluten cross
reacting food, number one.
OK.
And our bodies weren't designed
to digest animal proteins
like that, animal dairy
products like that.
>>LISA: Why is it
designed to digest
the meat but not the dairy?
>>KAJIKI: The body's designed--
the hydrochloric acids is
what digests the food.
That's what breaks down food.
But you already have these
dairy proteins in your system.
And those aren't
good for everybody.
I mean, some people, I can
have dairy, no problem.
But it's not probably
the best thing for me.
>>LISA: Mm.
So the body doesn't
produce the enzymes
to break down the dairy?
>>KAJIKI: It could.
I mean, in some cases, they
call that lactose intolerance.
It does.
But a lot of times people, they
don't have a lactose problem
as much as they have a
milk protein problem.
>>LISA: The casein.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Right.
So I've heard of the
casein free, sugar free,
gluten free diet.
That's usually, it's very common
in the autistic community.
So casein is a milk
protein that the body
doesn't digest very well.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
The body doesn't
like milk very much.
>>LISA: OK.
Well, we also haven't
talked very much about,
sugar, and what that
does to the body.
Because-- but I'm into the
foods that you can eat.
But real quickly, tell
me what sugar does.
>>KAJIKI: Well.
OK, so the sugar,
number one, is the sugar
is energy for your
body to utilize.
So that's how it uses that.
But if you eat a fast burning
sugar like a carbohydrate,
or a piece of corn,
or a potato, or rice,
it's a very fast burning sugar.
So it surges your insulin.
And then what happens is it's
got to get into the cell.
Well, if your body's
been constantly eating
carbohydrate foods
and high sugar
foods like corn, and
rice, and potatoes--
>>LISA: It doesn't
have to just be candy.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
It doesn't have to be candy,
you get insulin resistance,
which means now that cell
doesn't respond to the insulin
like it should.
And it doesn't open up to let
that blood sugar into the cell.
>>LISA: So that's what
insulin resistance is.
>>KAJIKI: That's what it is.
>>LISA: And then when someone
is diabetic, what happens there?
>>KAJIKI: So then
what happens is
you have all this blood
sugar left in your system.
So that blood sugar gets
shuttled over to the liver
and it becomes triglycerides,
cholesterol, and fat.
>>LISA: Wow.
OK, so what's the liver's
function with thyroid?
Are they very closely linked?
Or does the liver have a
lot to do with thyroiditis?
>>KAJIKI: One main
thing it has to do
is it converts the T4
hormone into T3 in the liver
and the gut and other tissues.
>>LISA: That's important.
>>KAJIKI: But about
60% of that T4
is converted into
T3 in the liver.
>>LISA: So the Synthroid is
effectively T4, taking T4.
And then like if you were to do
any type of a glandular, that's
the T3?
Is that why most of
that is prescribed?
>>KAJIKI: That's why
it's prescribed, right.
>>LISA: Does that
over-compensate
for the liver doing its
natural function when
you're taking those medications?
>>KAJIKI: I don't know
if it over-compensates,
but what it does is it
tricks the body into thinking
that there's enough
T4 and enough T3
in the system, when the
liver doesn't have anything
to do with that now.
It's bypassing that step.
>>LISA: Oh, I see.
Interesting.
So I wonder if it
untrains the liver
to do what it's supposed to do.
>>KAJIKI: I'm sure
it could-- I'm
sure it causes sluggish liver.
And your liver's responsible
for detoxifying your body.
So it will not allow these
excess female hormones
to be processed
out of your body.
And so now you've got a
thyroid hormone problem.
And you have an estrogen
problem on top of that.
>>LISA: Estrogen dominance
or lack of estrogen.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Interesting.
So taking the medications
could cause the secondary issue
that could very well
be the initial trigger.
Wow.
This is very complicated.
But it's-- I mean,
it's making sense.
It's just, it's a wheel.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
There's just a lot of
moving parts in this.
And very few doctors understand
all the moving parts.
>>LISA: Because there's a lot.
Well, all right.
So let's talk about continually
fixing this with food.
So we talked about fats.
You've got coconut oils, olive
oils, avocados, and fish,
fish oils, right?
OK.
So those are the four,
and then certain butters
like ghee, clarified butter.
>>KAJIKI: Ghee.
Clarified butter's probably OK.
>>LISA: So those are
five different types
of fats that I've just
talked about, right.
Those are safe.
>>KAJIKI: Those are safe.
>>LISA: For most diets.
Do the fats actually
decrease inflammation?
>>KAJIKI: I believe they do have
an anti-inflammatory component
to them.
But that's not really the
reason why we use them.
We use them because
your body needs fats.
And we're really cutting
out a lot of the fats
that you might have in
your diet typically.
So we really want you
to have those fats.
>>LISA: What about supplements
like CLA, the lipoic acid.
And you see these supplements
on the shelves that talk about
take this oil and it reduces
inflammation and takes fat out
of your body.
>>KAJIKI: It may be true.
It's hard to say.
I mean, that's what you call
a single nutrient deficiency,
single supplement solution.
And--
>>LISA: Yeah, OK.
>>KAJIKI: My line of practice
is I look at the triggers.
I give my supplementation
out to fix the triggers.
And I just feel like I
look at the big picture
and try to take care of the
small details along the way.
>>LISA: OK.
So it's interesting.
Because I want to keep
going back to the solutions.
But there's really very,
very simple solutions.
It's fats.
It's animal proteins, you
mentioned, and vegetables.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
And to simplify
it even more, it's
eat foods that are not
likely to inflame your body.
>>LISA: OK, well--
>>KAJIKI: That's really what is.
>>LISA: The right fats.
The right animal proteins.
Now you're talking about
all animal proteins?
>>KAJIKI: All animal
proteins are fine.
>>LISA: And then vegetables.
>>KAJIKI: And vegetables, yeah.
>>LISA: So what
vegetables do you not eat?
>>KAJIKI: We don't allow
you to eat potatoes.
We don't allow you
to eat nightshades.
>>LISA: Nightshades, which are--
>>KAJIKI: Potatoes,
tomatoes, peppers.
>>LISA: Eggplant.
>>KAJIKI: Eggplant, yeah.
>>LISA: And these have a
certain toxin in them, right?
>>KAJIKI: They do
have a certain toxin,
but once again,
they typically, they
will tend to flare people up.
Now, that's not everybody.
So when we start reintroducing,
then it'll be fine for them.
>>LISA: OK.
And these are just specifically
people with thyroid issues,
those types of foods can
inflame the thyroid issue.
>>KAJIKI: And we do
it for everybody else.
We do it for our
diabetic people.
arthritic people.
We do it for people who
just want to lose weight.
We do it for-- I mean,
it's a good eating plan
to have for anybody temporarily.
>>LISA: OK.
So we didn't talk about eggs.
You said your
body's OK with eggs.
But certain people--
>>KAJIKI: Some people are not.
>>LISA: All right.
That comes through
the tests, right?
>>KAJIKI: It comes
through tests.
Or it could come through
food reintroduction,
food provocation.
>>LISA: OK.
>>KAJIKI: I've had three people
in history, my history, that
swore they ate eggs up
until when they met me.
I took them away from eggs,
cleaned their gut out.
They reintroduced eggs.
And they got a reaction.
Because sometimes you
don't get a reaction--
>>LISA: You have three
that have said that?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah, and
so it's very few.
But to those three people,
they're glad they found out.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KAJIKI: So they either
have to not eat eggs
or they're experimenting
now with duck
eggs or other types of eggs.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So when you're-- OK.
So the three things, the
fats, the animal proteins,
and the vegetables.
What about vegetarians?
>>KAJIKI: Vegetarians
is a little bit tougher
because most of their protein
comes from beans, and legumes,
and soybeans.
And those we don't allow that.
So it's a little tougher.
It can be done.
We supplement their protein with
pea protein or coconut protein.
Sometimes they can
get away with hemp.
>>LISA: Hemp.
I was going to say hemp seeds.
OK.
>>KAJIKI: But they're
a little bit tougher.
Their choices are
lot more limited.
But it's not impossible.
>>LISA: It's not impossible.
You just have to just
pay more attention to it.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
Now supplements.
>>KAJIKI: Supplements.
>>LISA: So you mentioned some
anti-inflammatory supplements
that are sure fire to get
rid of the inflammation.
What are those?
>>KAJIKI: Key ones are turmeric,
resveratrol, fish oils,
and vitamin D.
>>LISA: OK.
So let's talk about turmeric.
It's been around forever.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Capsule form,
pill form, food form.
Spices.
What kind of form?
>>KAJIKI: You can't get
enough turmeric in your system
to make a noticeable difference
in inflammation unless it's
in a liquid form.
>>LISA: Liquid.
So you can't just
powder it on your fish.
>>KAJIKI: Right.
You can do that, and
yes it's good for you,
and no, it won't hurt.
But you can't take
enough to get enough
of a physiological effect
to reduce that inflammation.
And so I use a liquid
form of turmeric,
which is about
six times stronger
than any kind of capsule
formula that you can take.
It's OK take the capsules
maybe on an ongoing basis
after you've squelched
that inflammation.
But it's difficult to get
enough turmeric in your system
by just using capsules or foods.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So a liquid form of turmeric and
a liquid form of resveratrol?
>>KAJIKI: Resveratrol, right.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Now resveratrol is--
>>KAJIKI: From the grapes.
>>LISA: From the grapes, right.
So there's a lot of
those products out there.
Does it matter if it's
liquid or if it's powder or--
>>KAJIKI: Once again,
liquid ideally.
And then when you combine
it with the turmeric,
has a very synergistic effect.
>>LISA: Oh, nice.
Interesting.
Is it red or is it, commonly,
is it the color of grapes?
>>KAJIKI: I would
say no, not commonly.
I mean, our liquid is white.
>>LISA: White?
>>KAJIKI: Believe it or not.
Yeah.
>>LISA: It comes from grapes.
>>KAJIKI: It comes from grapes.
>>LISA: The middle
of the grapes.
OK.
>>KAJIKI: And we
have other types
of resveratrol--
capsules, powders,
which are white as well.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Very interesting.
OK.
And then you mentioned
vitamin D. How much vitamin D?
>>KAJIKI: Whoo.
It varies from person to person.
OK.
And I will tell you
this by experience
and what I've learned,
is that you can't just
arbitrarily supplement
people with vitamin D.
Because even though we're all
pretty short on it, about 60%
of the population has
something called a vitamin D
polymorphism.
>>LISA: What's that?
>>KAJIKI: Which means that
they can't process the vitamin
D properly.
And there's another blood test
for that, called a vitamin
D 125.
So there's the storage
form of vitamin D.
And then there's the
usable form of vitamin D.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>KAJIKI: And you
can't overdo one
in search of raising the other.
>>LISA: How do you know?
>>KAJIKI: You have
to have a doctor who
understands the test.
And you have to
get the test done.
So there's a level for
the 125, and then there's
a level for the 25.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
So sometimes I have
to settle for somebody
having a low vitamin D 25
because their 125 is maxed out.
>>LISA: So you can't
just say to anyone,
take 5,000 IUs of vitamin
D and you'll fine.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
>>LISA: It depends
on the person.
>>KAJIKI: Depends on the person.
>>LISA: That makes
so much sense.
It's not a one thing fixes all.
>>KAJIKI: Right,
>>LISA: That's the theme
of this whole show.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
I mean, vitamin D is very good.
And it's very good
for most people.
But people will take
some bits of advice
and then do it forever.
And you just don't
know if, you know--
>>LISA: And your
body changes, too.
>>KAJIKI: Your body changes.
And you don't want to chance
getting vitamin D toxicity.
And that's very possible.
>>LISA: Right.
OK.
So then you mentioned
fish oils as well.
And then can those be--
you can't get enough fish
oils from the fish alone, right?
You need to take a supplement.
>>KAJIKI: You've got
to take a supplement.
>>LISA: What does that do?
>>KAJIKI: Well, the fish oils
have so many great properties
out there.
I mean, it's de-inflammatory.
Helps your cholesterol.
Helps your brain function.
Helps your nerve function.
I mean, there's almost
nothing bad about a fish oil
that I can I think of.
>>LISA: Except there's
vegetarian fish oils, right?
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: No, there
couldn't be vegetarian.
>>KAJIKI: Well, they're
not vegetarian fish oils.
But they get the
omega from that, yes.
>>LISA: From the-- it would have
to come from seeds and nuts,
right?
>>KAJIKI: Right.
Well, I think that you can get
them from some of the beans
as well.
>>LISA: OK.
Depends on if your body is
allergic to those or not,
right?
OK.
All right.
And then salt.
Tell me why salt is, or an
iodine, is good or not good
for people with thyroiditis.
Because it seems that people
that have thyroid issues
crave salt.
Why is that?
>>KAJIKI: Honestly, I
hadn't heard that before.
>>LISA: Oh, you haven't?
Oh, OK.
That's been my experience.
>>KAJIKI: Really?
Is that they crave salt.
Huh.
Well, as far as my
take on salt goes,
I always like to use some
kind of a sea salt, where
you get the minerals
and the vitamins.
My position on iodine with
Hashimoto's is that iodine will
flare up the Hashimoto's.
There's enough
research out there.
There's enough evidence out
there to show that iodine will
flare up the Hashimoto's.
And in Southern
California, we just
don't have an iodine shortage.
>>LISA: No.
>>KAJIKI: We may in other
parts of the world, maybe
parts of the Midwest.
But we don't have
an iodine shortage
in southern California.
>>LISA: Well, in
the Midwest, just
explain-- people may not know.
>>KAJIKI: I think just because
of the way they process
their food and there is--
>>LISA: There's no salt water.
>>KAJIKI: There's
no salt water, yeah.
>>LISA: Mhm.
It's mostly salt water
fish that have the iodine.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: Because of the salt.
>>KAJIKI: Yes,
because of the salt.
And we get the seaweed products
that we have here, too.
>>LISA: Do you recommend
those, eating a lot of seaweed
and what about cultured foods?
Cultured vegetables, foods
that are fermented, probiotics.
>>KAJIKI: Fermented food,
definitely fermented foods,
right, to help
with the probiotics
and to help with the
building up of the probiotics
in the system, yes.
>>LISA: Do you ever recommend
additional probiotics
beyond that, like
little capsules?
>>KAJIKI: Always.
>>LISA: Oh, you do?
But once again,
based on lab tests.
Because there are
certain strains
that you may be
over on or under on.
>>LISA: Well, aren't most of
the probiotics based on dairy
products, like the lacto--
>>KAJIKI: Um.
Yes, but ones that I get
don't contain any dairy.
>>LISA: Right.
I've taken those
as well, the ones
that come from fruits
and vegetables, right.
And they're just
naturally fermented
over a certain amount of time.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
I mean, so probiotics are great.
But how much do you need?
Which strains do you need?
We don't know until
you do a test.
>>LISA: Testing.
It's all about the
individual body.
>>KAJIKI: It's
all about testing.
It really is.
It's--
>>LISA: So what types
of results have people
achieved as going
through your program?
>>KAJIKI: Amazing.
Amazing.
I mean, some people,
they'll tell me
they're 90% resolved of
their symptoms in two weeks.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KAJIKI: Some
people will tell me--
>>LISA: 90%.
>>KAJIKI: 90, yeah.
Some people will tell me
they're 75% in three months.
>>LISA: Why did you get
started in all this?
>>KAJIKI: My wife.
My wife came down with an
illness about eight years ago.
And nobody could
get it figured out.
And I started studying
functional medicine.
And I figured out
she had Hashimoto's.
And then I started talking
to other doctors that
knew more about it than I did.
And that's how I learned, is
I learned how to manage her
Hashimoto's.
And so to this day,
eight years later,
she's hasn't been
on any medication.
>>LISA: Did she have the typical
weight gain, and the fatigue,
and all of that?
>>KAJIKI: Fatigue.
>>LISA: How many different
doctors had she been to?
>>KAJIKI: Well, she'd
only been to probably two
different doctors, our family
GP and another specialist.
But the answer to yes, you're
right, You have Hashimoto's.
You're on medication forever.
That just wasn't
good enough for us.
And and so luckily,
we caught it early.
And I knew people who
knew more than me.
>>LISA: And you learned.
>>KAJIKI: And I learned, right.
And I did the testing.
And I did the protocols.
And I customized it for her.
And so now you wouldn't even
know she has Hashimoto's.
She's been relatively
asymptomatic
for almost seven years.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Do most people look you up
because of the weight problem?
>>KAJIKI: I would say yes.
I would say weight problem is
a big issue, weight and hair
loss are probably two of the
biggest issues that women face.
>>LISA: The cosmetic
reasons, but it gets you
to the root causes
as to-- yeah, diets.
Anyone who has this
type of specific illness
with Hashimoto's or thyroiditis
knows no diet works.
No hair supplement works.
It's all temporary.
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KAJIKI: You've got to
get to the root cause.
And you can't get to the root
cause unless you do testing.
>>LISA: Testing and also
the inflammatory triggers.
>>KAJIKI: Right, yeah.
>>LISA: Eating
every three hours.
Keeping your blood sugar stable.
Finding out if you have
any anemias or absorptions.
Did we cover B, vitamin
B and B12 and six
and folate and all of that?
>>KAJIKI: A little bit.
When people have a B12
problem, it's very often
times because of this
intrinsic factor.
They have an autoimmune
attack on the intrinsic factor
in their body.
So which means
they probably have
some kind autoimmune attack
going on in their stomach.
And they're not
absorbing this B12,
even though they're taking it.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: Or they're
causing an autoimmune attack
with the type B12
that they're taking.
>>LISA: OK.
Wow.
It gets so specific.
>>KAJIKI: It does.
And B12 deficiency
could mask itself
as an iron deficiency,
which could mask itself
as chronic fatigue.
I mean, you just don't know.
>>LISA: Ah, we haven't
mentioned that- chronic fatigue.
So your organization is called
the Valley Thyroid Institute.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: And is it called
the Valley Thyroid
because it's located in the
San Fernando Valley, or?
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
That's what why we called it.
But now we've
found a way to work
with people all over the world.
And so we can Skype with
them or phone with them.
And we found very effective
ways to work with them
on the other side of the world.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Have you found
out that there are
more people with this
illness worldwide?
Or is it really is it
specific to the US?
>>KAJIKI: It's all over.
And I would think it's more
underdiagnosed in other parts
of the world, just because we
have more advanced medicine
here.
We easily get to the
kind of doctors we need.
And I think in the case
of the United States,
it's better not to have
socialized medicine.
>>LISA: Oh, that's interesting.
Because it's not one
thing fits all again.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
It's amazing that--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: I get calls
from people in Canada
and people in London who
have socialized medicine.
>>LISA: And don't have
access to this specific--
>>KAJIKI: Right.
>>LISA: Testing and information.
>>KAJIKI: Exactly, because
if you don't fit their model,
you don't get the care.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
This doesn't fit a model.
It doesn't even really
fit it here in the US
until you dig into it deeper.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: It's at
the surface level.
>>KAJIKI: Yes.
>>LISA: That's why I think so
many people are underdiagnosed
in terms of this.
So you do help people
all over the world.
You can help them
wherever they're from
and just go through this
protocol with people.
And you've had the
most success with that.
And actually reversed
many of the symptoms.
Do people actually get
off their medication?
>>KAJIKI: Some.
>>LISA: Some.
>>KAJIKI: Some, yeah.
I would say a
sentence to medication
doesn't mean it's a
lifetime sentence.
It all depends on if
you really need it.
The earlier you catch
it, probably the better.
But you have to find out is
it really a thyroid problem?
Or is it just multiple
triggers going on?
>>LISA: How many
people do you think
that are on the medications
don't need to be,
because didn't you say that
those people are not getting
any better, even
though they keep
increasing their medication?
>>KAJIKI: Yeah.
It's hard to say.
I mean, I would say
at least 25% of them
can at least get off their
medication or lower the dosage.
>>LISA: Hm.
Interesting.
>>KAJIKI: That
would be my guess.
>>LISA: Well, I've
learned so much.
Thank you so much.
And I hope that you have
as well learned a lot.
Thank you so much, Dr. Kajiki.
>>KAJIKI: Thank you very much.
>>LISA: And again, it's called
the Valley Thyroid Institute.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Dr. Kajiki, or if you want
to share it with your friends,
you can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]